**Development of the SMARTLAB DIY Sensor Workshop**

The SMARTLAB project is assessing methods for implementing the Smart Readiness Indicator (SRI) within existing building stock in Limerick city centre. The SRI standard is intended to support efforts to improve efficiency, comfort and performance of buildings and contribute to targeted reductions in carbon emissions across society. The vision for this project is mapping a process where ordinarily ‘non-smart’ buildings can be brought up to a basic level of ‘smart readiness’ (O’Flaherty, 2023). The process of change encompassed by this aim is a socio-technical one, involving both technological and social innovations. A key aspect of this work is engaging with project participants to better understand how they view sensor technology and to demystify that technology so that it can be made more useful and impactful. In light of this, the project’s WP1-D1 Plan for Stakeholder Engagement describes how a Do It Yourself (DIY) approach is integrated into project delivery. This work is directly related to project objectives around the empowerment of smart energy citizens and the deployment of smart infrastructure.  

Although DIY sensors will not be installed as the default option in SMARTLAB participant buildings, due to ease of calibration of the factory-made devices and the need for a CE mark on the devices used, a core communication function of the project is to build and share DIY toolkits which are easy to use and understand by non-technical stakeholders (WP2, WP4). This is to support capacity building amongst stakeholders on the potential  of smart building technologies and to make these technologies more accessible.  

 

The project purchased a number of Arduino kits which can collect data critical to SRI evaluation and ongoing smart building services. There is potential for DIY sensors to contribute to an improved SRI rating in any building assessment, as it is the functionality of the technology, which is measured, and DIY sensors can potentially be more easily adapted to include control add-ons than proprietary technology. The availability of DIY kits will address several technical and financial barriers to the uptake of smart technologies already identified within project research, in the SMARTLAB deliverable WP1-D3 Barriers to Improving the Smartness of Buildings. 

This report outlines the work involved in developing project activities to support a Do-It-Yourself approach. It is a record of the following:  

- DIY Sensors – this chapter covers the development of a number of test DIY sensors for the project. It describes the 3D models made, CAD (Computer Aided Design) and ECAD (Electronic Computer Aided Design) and codes, JavaScript, HTML, C ++.   

- Workshops: this chapter covers the development of sensor demystification workshops with project participants. They are intended to be introductory lessons to familiarise participants with the relevant technology, facilitating the adoption of technology and supporting broader understanding of the functioning of the Internet of Things (IoT). Work in this area, carried out in Fab Lab Limerick and in the Citizen Innovation Lab and tested in preliminary workshops with Limerick’s "Maker Community" in November and December 2022, has been published on GitHub for further refinement by online communities: SMARTLAB Limerick on GitHub.  
